2020-06-30-trenchboot-grub-cbfs.md: introduction and cbfs/lzma verifi… (#291)
3mdeb/news-and-ideas: blog/content/post/2020-06-30-trenchboot-grub-cbfs.md

---
title: "TrenchBoot: Open Source DRTM. GRUB's new features and TPM event log."
abstract: This blog post will show you what features we have added to GRUB
          and why they are useful from user's point of view. Also, there
          will be shown how to utilize TPM event logs and hence debug DRTM.
cover: /covers/trenchboot-logo.png
author: piotr.kleinschmidt
layout: post
published: true
date: 2020-07-03
archives: "2020"

tags:
  - security
  - open-source
  - grub
  - trenchboot
  - nixos
categories:
  - Firmware
  - Security

---

If you haven't read previous blog posts from *TrenchBoot* series, we strongly

> encourage to catch it up. Best way, is to search under

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encourage to catch up on it. Best way, is to search under
```

Author: Fixed

[TrenchBoot](https://blog.3mdeb.com/tags/trenchboot/) tag. In this article, we
want to show what changes have been made in GRUB and what was our motivation to
introduce them. Also, we will introduce extension of **TPM event log** which

> lets users  debug DRTM and verify some operations. Besides theoretical

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lets users debug DRTM and verify some operations. Besides theoretical
```

Author: Fixed.

> considerations, there is the **verification part** which introduce particular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
considerations, there is the **verification part** which introduces particular
```

Author: Fixed

examples and verification procedures.

## GRUB additional feature - CBFS and LZMA support

Before moving to essential part of GRUB development, first you need to
understand what stands behind **CBFS** and **LZMA**. *CBFS* stands for *coreboot
filesystem* and it is 'kind of layout' in which every coreboot's binary file is
organized. As name might be misleading, it is **not actual filesystem**. It only
describes what components in what order should be presented in SPI Flash (if it
is flashed with coreboot of course). With such unification, it is much easier
for developers and users to manipulate coreboot's image, debug it or check its
integrity. Also, it allows to makes changes on final binary file (e.g. adding or
removing some part of coreboot) by utilizng special tool - `cbfstool`. More
about it will be presented later.

Second abbreviation - **LZMA** stands for *Lempel-Ziv-Markov chain-Algorithm*
and it is **compression algorithm** strongly used in coreboot (and not only

> there). As SPI flash capacity is not great, but hardware and BIOS is getting

Reviewer: I would also mention relatively low read speeds of flash, so less data to read = faster boot, even with decompression time, which for LZMA is one of the worst when compared to other algorithms.

Author: Added information about boot time speed up.

more complex and in effect final binary files are larger, it is common to use
compression wherever it is possible. Therefore, LZMA can be utilized in coreboot
for e.g. payloads. The goal is simple - make binary file as slim as possible, so
there is more space for the other components. Moreover, LZMA has high degree of
compression. Hence using it is not triumph of form over content, but very
reliable solution.

Now, when you have some theoretical background, you probably have one question -
how it is related to TrenchBoot and GRUB? Answer is very simple. We prepare GRUB
to support making operations on CBFS files (coreboot binaries) to create basis
for possible LZ integration into coreboot's project. It means that in the

> feature, there will be possibility to have LZ already included in coreboot's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
future, there will be possibility to have LZ already included in coreboot's
```

Author: Fixed.

can use `cbfstool` utility. It is available with coreboot repository, in
`coreboot/util/cbfstool` directory. We recommend to use
[pcengines/coreboot](https://github.com/pcengines/coreboot/tree/develop/)
repository for apu platforms. To prepare image with custom text file, follow the
procedure below.

1. Download latest coreboot release from [github.io](https://pcengines.github.io/)

    ```
    $ wget https://3mdeb.com/open-source-firmware/pcengines/apu2/apu2_v4.12.0.2.rom -O apu2_v4.12.0.2.rom
    ```

    > At time of writing this blog post, v4.12.0.2.rom was latest release

2. Clone
[pcengines/coreboot](https://github.com/pcengines/coreboot/tree/develop/)
repository.

    ```
    $ git clone https://github.com/pcengines/coreboot -b develop
    ```

3. Enter `coreboot/util/cbfstool` directory and build `cbfstool`.

    ```
    $ cd coreboot/util/cbfstool
    $ make
    ```

    If built was successful, there should be executable file `./cbfstool`
    available.

4. Create text file with any content you wish.

    Only limitation here is to have long enough content, so LZMA will be done.
    If file is too short (e.g. it contains only one sentence), most probably

>     LZMA won't execute on it and it won't be compressed. Name the file

Reviewer: Reason for this should be explained, e.g.

```suggestion
    LZMA will produce a file bigger than the original (because of the compression header and dictionary) and `cbfstool` will choose the uncompressed form instead. Name the file
```

Author: Changed

    ```

    > There should be `updating GRUB 2 menu...` log after above command. It
    indicates that grub has been updated.

3. Reboot system and check if you can boot to NixOS via `Secure Launch` entry.

    ```
    $ reboot
    ```

If GRUB update procedure went well, we can move on to *GRUB CBFS and LZMA
support* verification.

#### GRUB CBFS and LZMA support verification

1. Reboot platform and go to GRUB menu.

    ```
    $ reboot
    (...)

    *NixOS - Default
    NixOS - Secure Launch
    NixOS - All configurations

    Press enter to boot the selected OS, `e' to edit the commands       
    before booting or `c' for a command-line.                                                                                                                                                 
    ```

2. Press `c` to enter command-line. Do not boot to NixOS.

    ```
    Minimal BASH-like line editing is supported. For the first word, TAB   
    lists possible command completions. Anywhere else TAB lists possible   
    device or file completions. ESC at any time exits.

    grub>
    ```

3. Load necessary modules for CBFS and LZMA support.

    ```

>     grub> insmod /boot/grub/i386-pc/lzma.mod

Reviewer: Please check if `insmod lzma` is enough. These commands would be different for UEFI platform.

Author: BIOS environment is enough for verification. As I remember `insmod lzma` wasn't sufficient

    sentence.
    It is the second part of file, just to have something else besides one repeated
    sentence.
    It is the second part of file, just to have something else besides one repeated
    sentence.
    It is the second part of file, just to have something else besides one repeated
    sentence.
    Third part:
    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Proin nibh augue, susc
    ipit a, scelerisque sed, lacinia in, mi. Cras vel lorem. Etiam pellentesque ali
    quet tellus. Phasellus pharetra nullla ac diam. Quisque semper justo at risus. D
    onec venenatis, turpis vel hendrerit interdum, dui ligula ultricies purus, sed
    posuere libero dui id orci. Nam congue, pede vitae dapibus aliquet, elit magna
    vulputate arcu, vel tempus metus leo non est. Etiam sit amet lectus quis est co
    ngue mollis. Phasellus congue lacus eget neque. Phasellus ornare, ante vitae co
    nsectetuer consequat, purus sapien ultricies dolor, et mollis pede metus eget n
    isi. Praesent sodales velit quis augue. Cras suscipit, urna at aliquuam rhoncus,
    urna quam viverra nisi, in interdum massa nibh nec erat.
    ```

>     If content of above command is exactly the same as your `test-file.txt`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If the content of above command is exactly the same as your `test-file.txt`,
```

Author: Fixed.

>     than it means that **GRUB supports LZMA**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    then it means that **GRUB supports LZMA decompression of CBFS files**
```

Author: Fixed.

## TPM event log

> Recently, we have possibility to verify firmware by analyzing PCRs values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recently, we had possibility to verify firmware by analyzing PCRs values.
```

Author: Fixed.

> However, there is still lack of information about TPM itself. User doesn't have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, there is still lack of information about TPM operations itself. User doesn't have
```

Author: Fixed

> any details about operations which are done, especially hashes of every measured

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any details about measurements which were done (hashes of every measured
```

Author: Fixed

> component. Without them, it is hard to make an attestation and fully trust that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
component). Without them, it is hard to make an attestation and fully trust that
```

Author: Fixed

firmware is not malicious. As we see this deficiency, we introduced **TPM event
log**. Idea is very simple. Every event related to TPM is registered. It means
that every operation done by TPM is memorized and can be accessed by user at any
time. Most interesting parts are of course **hashes of every firmware
component**. With this knowledge and details about PCR extension process

> (extension order mostly) user have tool to analyze them, if there is a need,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(extension order mostly) user has a way to analyze PCRs and, if there is a need,
```

Author: Fixed.

verify against corruption. All you have to do is to make your own calculations
and see if every step is exactly as TPM event log reports.

As you can see, it is a great security feature because now user has possibility
to attest TPM. In case of calculations incompatibility, it also allows to easily
track corrupted part of firmware. Now, when you know what is TPM event log and
we believe you see its great benefit, let's see how it works and how to use it.

### TPM event log verification

Hardware and firmware specification which we are using for test:

- PC Engines apu2 platform with TPM2.0 or TPM1.2
- coreboot v4.12.0.2
- NixOS operating system

>We don't ensure valid test results if you don't have exactly the same
configuration and environment as above.

Following procedure will guide you step-by-step how to enable and read TPM event
log. Before giving final example, you need to prepare all necessary components.

1. Install `xxd` tool.

    > This tool will be used during `landing-zone` build, so it must be done
    earlier.

    ```
    $ cd ~/nixpkgs
    $ nix-build -A unixtools.xxd
    (...)
    /nix/store/2q94zc1agpkvchxxnx6pwy1v6rpdqzdx-xxd-1003.1-2008
    ```

>     Last line points to directory where package is installed. Copy `/bin/xxd`

Reviewer: Is this really necessary? Every sane build system would include some kind of 'install' operation.

Author: It is necessary if we want to have xxd. I didn't investigate why it is missed in base install and don't have really time for that

    nw8rsi5jfx9zikv06dhjxc6a5219xr20-landing-zone-0.6.0.drv
    ```

    >`landing-zone-0.6.0` without any extension is directory you looking for.

    ```
    $ cp /nix/store/bqi0phr2rvwqlzfr3qj5117arxjhlbil-landing-zone-0.6.0/lz_header.bin /boot/lz_header
    ```

5. Reboot platform and boot to NixOS Secure Launch.

6. Install `cbmem-tb` package manually.

    ```
    $ cd ~/nixpkgs
    $ nix-build -A cbmem-tb
    (...)
    /nix/store/8y25mfqw0igqa5yfpvrks0nvr5wah5kn-cbmem-4.12
    ```

7. Copy `cbmem` utility to home directory.

    ```
    $ cd /nix/store/
    $ ls | grep -i 'cbmem-4.12'
    8y25mfqw0igqa5yfpvrks0nvr5wah5kn-cbmem-4.12
    b4pds6l5fbkxdykkf2248c4mfnhf5ll5-cbmem-4.12.drv
    plm3jyg54hjyiy3zldclx83k14i34lpq-cbmem-4.12.drv
    pzifnqhgk0xarm3xrgkn07s9l572aw5p-cbmem-4.12.lock
    ```

    Search for entry with `cbmem-4.12` without any extension. In above case
    `cbmem` is installed in
    `/nix/store/8y25mfqw0igqa5yfpvrks0nvr5wah5kn-cbmem-4.12` directory.

    ```
    $ cp /nix/store/8y25mfqw0igqa5yfpvrks0nvr5wah5kn-cbmem-4.12/sbin/cbmem ~/
    ```

7. Go to home directory and use `cbmem` to read TPM event log.

    ```
    $ cd ~
    $ ./cbmem -d

>     DRTM TPM2 log:

Reviewer 2: Ohh this log needs formatting. There is a lack of new lines:
```
        Specification: 2.00
        Platform class: PC Client
        No vendor information provided
    DRTM TPM2 log entry 1:
        PCR: 17
        Event type: Unknown (0x600)
        Digests:
                 SHA1: 2400e5bdfbaa8cfc42eae13d9b742b89d0ba35b4
                 SHA256: b65067767baf988b18e3a83410f90f055a4dcd59509b1ab6b17e18926ad8de82
        Event data not provided
    DRTM TPM2 log entry 2:
        PCR: 17
        Event type: Unknown (0x601)
        Digests:
                 SHA1: ecad3658a0cda535a8db50c207d726d2dac46509
                 SHA256: f76f571cb78beddba64ceab81b679ab3328ec15e2c4ff49f9fff625c300dc5a1
        Event data: Kernel
```
I will add to the develop branch what is needed

Reviewer 2: @piotr-kleins the output should be formatted like above. I have pushed a commit that fixes it, you may try and verify

        Event data not provided
    DRTM TPM2 log entry 2:
        PCR: 17
        Event type: Unknown (0x601)
        Digests:                 SHA1: ecad3658a0cda535a8db50c207d726d2dac46509
                 SHA256: f76f571cb78beddba64ceab81b679ab3328ec15e2c4ff49f9fff625c300dc5a1
        Event data: Kernel
    ```

    > `-d` flag means 'print DRTM TPM log'. For more information about cbmem
    usage, type `cbmem --help`.

    Above logs are collected on platform with TPM2.0. Below there is example for
    platform with TPM1.2.

    ```
    $ cd ~
    $ ./cbmem -d
    DRTM TCPA log:
            Specification: 1.21     Platform class: PC Client
            No vendor information provided
    DRTM TCPA log entry 1:
            PCR: 17
            Event type: Unknown (0x600)
            Digest: 2400e5bdfbaa8cfc42eae13d9b742b89d0ba35b4
            Event data not provided
    DRTM TCPA log entry 2:
            PCR: 17
            Event type: Unknown (0x601)
            Digest: ecad3658a0cda535a8db50c207d726d2dac46509
            Event data: Kernel
    ```

As you can see output for platform with TPM1.2 is slightly different than with

> TPM2.0. However, both are showing events and hashes which extend PCR 17. For

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TPM2.0. This is due to different TPM specification requirements about TPM 1.2 event log and TPM 2.0 event log.
However, both are showing events and hashes which extend PCR 17. For
```

Author: Fixed.

> now, there is lack of support for TPM event log in Linux kernel. Therefore,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
now, there is lack of support for adding entries to the DRTM TPM event log in Linux kernel. Therefore,
```

What do you mean by `final values`? The final PCR value is not present in the event log, in fact there are no PCR values at all. These are the hashes with which PCRs are *extended*.

If you want to show how these can be replayed, you may use something like:
```
. util.sh
extend_sha1 0000000000000000000000000000000000000000 <sha1 digest of log entry 1 - SKINIT> <sha1 of log entry 2 - kernel> <sha1 of whole initrd file, which should be one of the next log entries>
```

Author: Changed as you suggested

final values **are not the same** as those read with tpm_tools. We are going to
add this feature in near future, so TPM event log will be complete and will be
suitable for real-case use.

> 

Reviewer 2: @piotr-kleins I would add the verification of the 1st log entry (which should be LZ). For example use script to show the hash of LZ (calculated from binary not the extended hash) and compare it to the log entry.

Author: I was wondering how to verify them. That's good idea. I will add this

Author: I've added example for TPM2.0

## Summary

As you can see, in this release we mainly focus on TrenchBoot's components
adaptation to suit further requirements. First of all, we have made big step for
integration TrenchBoot into coreboot. We introduced changes in GRUB, co it would
operate on CBFS files and treat with LZMA. Second of all, we added *TPM event
logs* which further allow users to attest their platform on their own. Briefly
speaking, although presented features seem to be not very useful now, they will

> definitely crucial in TrenchBoot project development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
definitely be crucial in TrenchBoot project development.
```

Author: Fixed.
